An incident response plan is the documentation of
a predetermined set of procedures to detect,
respond to, and limit consequences of
a malicious cyber attack against an organization's systems.
Common elements of an incident response planning process include,
first, establishing roles and contact information.
So having trained staff who know exactly what to do and
how to notify the right people as an important part of incident response planning.
Also, outlining notification steps.
Many different groups may require notification throughout the incident.
For example, you have to notify impacted customers or
subjects when their personal data has been leaked under some regulations.
In order to communicate that,
you probably need someone from your communications or public relations team to step in,
and those triggers must be clear.
Also, creating an incident procedure checklist is another component.
The incident checklist is
the step-by-step playbook for responders and one of the most important parts.
Well, they should tell you step-by-step what to do.
The reality of cyber incidents is that there will always
be curved balls and gaps that don't have answers,
and so you have to be flexible enough to adapt
quickly in these situations and still press on with response.
Another element is determining how to categorize and prioritize incidence.
Just like threats and vulnerabilities have different severity levels, so do incidence.
Every incident won't warrant complete incident response team activation.
It's important to outline what triggers,
what incident types and severities matter the most.
This is usually done based on impact.
A greater potential impact from an incident would lead
to that being prioritized and addressed before more minor ones.
Also providing guidance on business continuity and disaster recovery triggers
and outlining the steps to take when incident response simply is not enough.
Finally, you need provisions for a continuous improvement process.
This cannot be overlooked.
Lessons learned are golden in incident response,
and can be used to make you better and faster at addressing incidents in the future.
The incident response plan usually gets activated when there is
a credible indicator of compromise or confirmed incident.
It's important to distinguish what constitutes an event from an incident.
All events are not incidence,
but all incidence involve events.
I'll break that down a bit.
An event is any observable occurrence or action that happens in an information system.
While an incident is an occurrence,
much like an event that actually or potentially jeopardizes the confidentiality,
integrity, or availability of a system.
So incidence typically pose an imminent threat
of violation of security policies and procedures.
For example, I found myself dealing with the situation in my career where I learned that
an entire internal database with sensitive information was posted online,
and this was immediately considered an incident.
In fact, it's a breach.
A common way to detect whether an event
is an incident is through indicators of compromise.
These are known signals that suggests a potential event is indeed an incident.
For example, I found myself in another situation earlier in my career where
I got a notification that looked like a potential indicator of compromise,
and so an application system went offline and
users couldn't access it for a few hours and then it randomly came back up.
Now, could it be an event?
Could it be an incident? I had to explore.
I had to think through possibilities and also do some research by looking through logs,
detection systems and more in order to figure out what might be going on.
Well, it turns out the system was offline for routine updates,
but some users just didn't see the email notification.
So because it's routine maintenance,
it's not an incident,
but it is indeed an event.
However, if in this example,
I found that the availability was degraded because it was
being hit with fake traffic or there was
a sketchy process running that ate up all of the CPU power,
then that might be considered an incident.
In summary, an indicator of compromise can help you distinguish an event from
an incident in order to determine if you should activate your incident response plan.